# Forts Amid Mounds of Garbage

Forts Amid Mounds of Garbage

What John Kenneth Galbraith wrote in 1958 about the US resonates in India today. "In a community where public services have failed to keep abreast of private consumption, things are very different. Here, in an atmosphere of private opulence and public squalor, the private goods have full sway."

The economist, Niranjan Rajadhyaksha, made the above comparison in a post on X, and in my mind, this sentiment also finds expression in Season 1 of Sacred Games. The main protagonist, Sartaj, describes Mumbai as ‘mounds of garbage interspersed with forts’ (*bas ab yahi to Bambai hai, kachre ke dher aur beech beech me kile*) observing the same phenomenon as Galbraith: when public services and governance fail due to an inept state, disinterested elites, or an excessive faith in the market’s ability to provision goods, we get private opulence and general squalor. Today, in the gated societies of Delhi and ubiquitous vertical complexes of Worli and Lower Parel in Mumbai, elites use their market power to purchase private education, bespoke healthcare, private security, private transport, and shut themselves off from the rest of the city.

A discussion with two friends about the role of the public sector prompted this essay. Both my friends are techno-optimists. In their worldview, ‘solving’ complex problems involves mapping capital to the right talent in an environment where incentives and raw materials combine to foster the required innovation. The role of the state is circumscribed to an entity that 1) enforces contracts and 2) creates an environment laden with the ‘right’ incentives to enable this mapping of capital to talent. However, this approach falters and does considerable harm when it comes to key planks of the welfare economy such as education and healthcare. 

Public Goods and Market Failure

Several goods and services that we value are public goods: non-rival and non-exclusive. Potable water, sanitation, and clean air cannot be efficiently provided through the private sector because no one can be excluded from their benefits, making them unprofitable to supply. While medical services provided by the health system are not public goods, they are uniquely subject to market failure. 

Many of the preconditions required for the market to efficiently allocate resources are absent and the market’s false assumption of equal endowment is particularly harmful. Classical economic theory assumes that all actors in the market have the income to purchase what they need. However, income is not distributed fairly, and for-profit producers of healthcare services will only service those who are able to pay, systematically excluding the poor and socially marginalized. As such, it is vital for the state to build the capacity to support those without the ability to pay by playing a dual role. It must *act as a buyer of health services and deliver high-quality services* to segments of the population who the private sector will not be able to serve. The state must be involved in both the demand and supply of care. 

Why Does the Indian State Flail?

Unfortunately, the Indian state is notorious in its inability to provide services - the economist Lant Pritchett memorably called it a ‘flailing state.’ One of the most compelling ideas for the underlying drivers of weak state capacity is advanced in Kartik Muralidharan’s new book. Kartik suggests that since India became democratic in 1947, the state’s scope had to be expanded much faster than its ability to deliver. The state’s mechanisms were those of an institution designed to extract (in line with the purpose of a colonial state) and now, with the expansion of democratic accountability in a desperately poor country, it was suddenly expected to provide. This mismatch between the expectations placed on the state and its capabilities led to continued inefficient provision, and the entrenchment of a predatory state. 

This historical context of universal franchise, a poor electorate, and low state capacity, fostered clientilism and the cultivation of patrimonial networks. Gas cylinders, rice, grain, laptops and other private goods were provided to citizens in exchange for votes, and in a sleight of hand, the citizen was converted to a beneficiary (a *labharthi* to use an apt term from the work of Yamini Aiyar). It should be recognized that the rights based discourse and substantive welfare agenda of the UPA-1 government in the early to mid 2000s offered a stark exception to this norm. However, on the whole, this conversion of the citizen to a beneficiary made it easier for the state to abdicate its responsibility to provide universal high-quality healthcare services. The emphasis on direct transfers of various private goods also burdened the exchequer, and limited the fiscal space available to invest in robust systems for the provision of public and merit goods such as education and healthcare. 

Economic liberalization and the forms it has taken since 1991 also accelerated this dynamic. Private actors began to respond to the demand for goods and services and in healthcare, we saw a mass exit of those *with the ability to pay from the public healthcare system.* 70% of health services in India are now provided by private providers. Five-star specialty hospitals sprung up at a dizzying rate across the metros but catered almost exclusively to economic elites. This further weakened the public system as once economic elites exited the public system, there was less incentive to strengthen public healthcare provisioning. 

Bridging the Gap

Who will fill the care delivery gap that is left behind? Will AI-enabled health services entrepreneurs looking to provide care at a profit address the health needs of Indians who lack the ability to pay for services? Is Practo increasing access to care for the poorest 50% of Indians or is it just making the life of the top 10% of Indians more convenient? If the latter, then sure, it’s an important intervention, but is it solving the most pressing problems in the health services landscape and bringing care to those who need it? 

Relying on for-profit entities (often laden with capital from private equity groups) to address demand also requires strong governance and regulatory oversight, a challenge in a context where the state is ineffective at enforcing standards. Limited oversight can lead to the prioritization of profits over patient outcomes, the proliferation of overcharging, unnecessary diagnostics and drug use, financial extortion of patients with limited means, and underqualified providers offering medical services. As such, a regulatory and governance vacuum makes private providers even less likely to effectively address the supply and demand gap for healthcare services. 

Looking Beyond Entrepreneurship

The entrepreneur is the great problem-solving figure of our time and while entrepreneurship backed by a mix of private and public finance will continue to solve many hard problems, there are other ways to solve problems – *collective action by the demos, government action, carefully thought-out public policy.* Importantly, there are many pressing issues that are better addressed through the latter approaches and not through the alignment of capital, talent, and the creation of a for-profit enterprise. It is essential to distinguish between these, and to borrow from Anand Giridharadas in Winners Take All, ‘not allow elites to attempt to solve all public problems privately and crowd out the public sector, reducing both its legitimacy and its efficacy, and replacing civic goals with narrow, selfish concerns about efficiency and markets.’ 

It may be tempting to think that progress is best pursued by circumscribing the role of government to embedding the right incentives for the private sector *to solve social problems while making money*, in a rosy win-win scenario that involves *doing well and doing good*. But as Galbraith describes, that approach runs the risk of creating islands of private splendor and squalor for the rest — a prospect that is not acceptable in healthcare. More reflection on the part of tech leaders, owners of capital, and by extension, social elites, on what they can achieve and where they may be doing harm would be very welcome.

Coalitions for Enhanced State Capacity

Ultimately, to enhance and institutionalize the regulatory capacity of the state and its effectiveness as a buyer and/or provider of essential healthcare services, persistent demands must be made by a coalition of social elites and non-elites. Technology-enabled innovation fueled by the private sector remains an important tool but it is unlikely to secure universal primary care, a universal basket of essential secondary/tertiary level services, and true public goods like clean air. When it comes to healthcare delivery in India, the retreat of the state must be arrested, the capacity for public provision of care enhanced, and the vision of proverbial forts amid mounds of garbage squarely rejected.